vyaktāvyaktamidaṃ na kiñcidabhavatprākprākṛtaprakṣaye
māyāyām guṇasāmyaruddhavikṛtau tvayyāgatāyāṃ layam |
no mṛtyuśca tadā'mṛtaṃ ca samabhūnnāhno na rātre: sthiti-
statraikastvamaśiṣyathā: kila parānandaprakāśātmanā ||1||
vyakta-avyaktam-idaṃ	this (universe) made up of the gross and the subtle (manifested and unmanifested)
na kiñcit-abhavat-	nothing existed
prāk-prākṛta-prakṣaye	before Praakrita Pralaya
māyāyām	(when) Maayaa (Thy cosmic creative power)
guṇa-sāmya-ruddha-vikṛtau	whose modifications were neutralised by the equipoise of the three Gunaas
tvayi āgatāyāṃ layam	and had become latent in Thee,
no mṛtyu: ca	neither death
tadā-amṛtaṃ ca	and then nor liberation
samabhūta-	(did) exist
na-ahna:	neither day
na rātre:	or night
sthiti:	was in existence
tatra-eka: - tvam-	then Thou as the Only One (without another)
aśiṣyathā: kila	did remain, certainly
parānanda-prakāśa-ātmanā	as Supreme Bliss Consciousness
This world consisting of the manifest and the unmanifest worlds (gross and the subtle) did not exist at all, before and during the total dissolution.The three Gunaas (Satwa, Rajas and Tamas) of Maya were in equilibrium, preventing any modification and so had become latent in Thee. At that time neither death nor liberation existed. Day and night also did not exist. Thou alone remained at that time as the Supreme Bliss Consciousness.
kāla: karma guṇāśca jīvanivahā viśvaṃ ca kāryaṃ vibho
cillīlāratimeyuṣi tvayi tadā nirlīnatāmāyayu: |
teṣāṃ naiva vadantyasattvamayi bho: śaktyātmanā tiṣṭhatāṃ
no cet kiṃ gaganaprasūnasadṛśāṃ bhūyo bhavetsaṃbhava: ||2||
kāla:	Time
karma	Karma (effects of actions of Jivas)
guṇā: - ca	and the three Gunas
jīvanivahā:	and all the Jivas
viśvaṃ ca kāryaṃ	and the universe which is an effect (of Maya)
vibho	O All pervading Lord!
cit-līlāratim-eyuṣi tvayi	in Thy own nature of pure Consciousness, were absorbed
tadā	at that time (of Maha Pralaya)
nirlīnatām-āyayu:	and had become completely merged (in Thee)
teṣāṃ na-eva vadanti-	of them (the Srutis) do not declare
asattvam-	absolute non existence
ayi bho:	O Lord!
śaktyātmanā tiṣṭhatāṃ	in the form of causal entities they remained
no cet kiṃ	otherwise how
gagana-prasūna-sadṛśāṃ	like the sky flower
bhūya: bhavet-saṃbhava:	is manifestation again possible (in the new creative cycle)
O All pervading Lord! Then, Time, Karmas (effects of good and bad actions), Gunas (Satwa, Rajas and Tamas), all the Jivas and the entire universe (born out of Maayaa) were all merged in Thee and Thou were absorbed in Thy own nature of pure Consciousness Bliss. However, O Lord! the Srutis do not declare them as being non existent. They remained in causal form. Otherwise, like the non existence of the flowers in the sky, how could they come into existence again.
evaṃ ca dviparārdhakālavigatāvīkṣāṃ sisṛkṣātmikāṃ
bibhrāṇe tvayi cukṣubhe tribhuvanībhāvāya māyā svayam |
māyāta: khalu kālaśaktirakhilādṛṣṭaṃ svabhāvo'pi ca
prādurbhūya guṇānvikāsya vidadhustasyāssahāyakriyām ||3||
evaṃ ca	and in this manner
dvi-parārdha-kāla-vigatau-	the period of two Parardhas having ended
īkṣāṃ sisṛkṣātmikāṃ	(when) the glance with the will to create
bibhrāṇe tvayi	was cast by Thee
cukṣubhe	got activated
tribhuvanī-bhāvāya	for the creation of the three worlds
māyā svayam	Maayaa (bestirred) herself
māyāta: khalu	from Maayaa indeed
kāla-śakti: -	the power known as Time,
akhila-adṛṣṭaṃ	all that is latent (the effects of the deeds of the Jivas)
svabhāva: -api ca	and the resulting tendencies (innate nature)
prādurbhūya	emerging
guṇān-vikāsya	activating the three Gunaas
vidadhu: -	acted (so as to)
tasyā: -sahāyakriyām	support her (Maayaa's) work
Thus when a period of two Paraardhaas ended, Thou cast Thy glance, which was with the will to create the three worlds. Then Maayaa (Thy creative power) got activated and from it emerged the power of time, the impressions of karma and the resulting tendencies. These supported Maayaa by disturbing the balance of the three Gunaas and diversified as the manifested universe.
māyāsannihito'praviṣṭavapuṣā sākṣīti gīto bhavān
bhedaistāṃ pratibiṃbato viviśivān jīvo'pi naivāpara: |
kālādipratibodhitā'tha bhavatā saṃcoditā ca svayaṃ
māyā sā khalu buddhitattvamasṛjadyo'sau mahānucyate ||4||
māyā-sannihita: -	having Maayaa as adjunct only
apraviṣṭa-vapuṣā	but without getting influenced by it (untainted by it)
sākṣī-iti gīta: bhavān	Thou are mere witness, it is proclaimed (in the Vedas)
bhedai: -tāṃ	in diverse appearances in that Maayaa
pratibiṃbata:	as reflections
viviśivān jīva: -api	Thou entered as individual soul also
na-eva-apara:	(which) is not at all different from ( Thee)
kāla-ādi-pratibodhitā-	being aroused by Time etc.
atha bhavatā saṃcoditā ca	then also well prompted by Thee
svayaṃ māyā sā khalu	that Maayaa itself indeed
buddhi-tattvam-asṛjat-	projected the principle of Intelligence
ya: -asau	which (buddhi tatva)
mahān-ucyate	is called Mahat
O Lord! Thou has Maayaa by Thy side, but are not influenced by it. The scriptures declare Thee as mere witness. Thy appearances in the diverse forms of Maayaa are mere reflections called Jivas which are not different from Thee. Maayaa being aroused by time and prompted by Thee, projected the principle of Intelligence, which is called Mahat.
tatrāsau triguṇātmako'pi ca mahān sattvapradhāna: svayaṃ
jīve'smin khalu nirvikalpamahamityudbodhaniṣpādka: |
cakre'smin savikalpabodhakamahantattvaṃ mahān khalvasau
sampuṣṭaṃ triguṇaistamo'tibahulaṃ viṣṇo bhavatpreraṇāt ||5||
tatra-	there (among the effects of Maayaa)
asau triguṇātmaka: - api ca	that (Mahat) though comprising of all the three Gunaas
mahān	Mahat
sattvapradhāna: svayaṃ	being itself predominantly Saatwic
jīve-asmin khalu	in the collective Jiva, indeed
nirvikalpam-aham-iti-	as the total 'I' sense, without the sense of plurality causes the cognition
udbodha-niṣpādka:	created in the Jiva
cakre - asmin	that which causes the awareness of
savikalpa-bodhaka-	separate individuality
mahat-tatvaṃ	Ahankaara (Ego)
mahān khalu-asau	this same Mahat indeed
sampuṣṭaṃ triguṇai: -	though having all the three Gunaas in full measure
tama: - atibahulaṃ	being dominated by Tamas
viṣṇo	O All pervading Lord
bhavat preraṇāt	by Thy prompting
O All pervading Lord! Even though this Mahat Tatwa is made up of three Gunaas, it is predominated by Satwa. Hence it recognizes the collective Jivas as macro "I". (As cosmic whole and not as individual entities). But the same Mahat Tatwa, when predominated by Tamas and Rajas, creates by Thy will the feeling of individual "I" called Aham Tatwa.
so'haṃ ca triguṇakramāt trividhatāmāsādya vaikāriko
bhūyastaijasatāmasāviti bhavannādyena sattvātmanā
devānindriyamānino'kṛta diśāvātārkapāśyaśvino
vahnīndrācyutamitrakān vidhuvidhiśrīrudraśārīrakān ||6||
sa: - ahaṃ ca	and that Ahankaara
triguṇa-kramāt	in accordance with the three Gunaas
trividhatām-āsādya	divided into three
vaikārika:	as Vaikaarika (the Saatwik part)
bhūya: taijasa-tāmasau-	further as Tejas (Raajasic part) and as Tamas (the Taamasic part)
iti bhavan-	thus became
ādyena sattva-ātmanā	by means of the first, which is predominantly Saatwic
devān-indriyamānina: -akṛta	created the gods who presided over the sense organs, organs of action and the mind (Anthahkarana)
diśā-vāta-arka-pāśi-aśvina:	the directions (Dik) -air (Vaayu), sun (Soorya), water (Varuna), the gods presiding over the 5sense organs (Ashavini devas)
vahnī-indra-acyuta-mitrakān	Agni, Indra, Upendra, Mitra, Prajaapati (presiding over the 5 organs of action)
vidhu-vidhi-śrīrudra-śārīrakān	the Moon, Brahma, Sri Rudra, Kshetrajna (presiding over the Antahkarana)
This Aham Tatwa (Ahamkaara) further categorized itself,based on the three Gunaas as Vaikarika (Satwa), Tejas (Rajas) and Tamas (Tamas).From Satwa were created the presiding deities of : Gyanendriyaas -(organs of knowledge) which are Dik Devata (of hearing), Vaayu (of touch), Soorya (of seeing), Varuna (of taste) and Ashwini Devatas (of smell). Karmendriyaas - (organs of action) which are Agni (of speech), Indra (of hands), Vishnu (of the legs), Mitra (of excretion) and Prajaapati (of reproduction). Antahkarana -(Inner equipment consisting of Mana, Buddhi, Ahankaara and Chit) which are Moon (of mind), Brahma (of Buddhi- the intellect), Rudra (of Ahamkaara) and Kshetrajna (of Chitt -memory).
bhūman mānasabuddhyahaṃkṛtimilaccittākhyavṛttyanvitaṃ
taccānta:karaṇaṃ vibho tava balāt sattvāṃśa evāsṛjat |
jātastaijasato daśendriyagaṇastattāmasāṃśātpuna-
stanmātraṃ nabhaso marutpurapate śabdo'jani tvadbalāt ||7||
bhūman	O Infinite One!
mānasa-buddhi-ahaṃkṛti-milat-	the mind, intellect and ego including
cittākhya-vṛtti-anvitaṃ	memory, these modes constituting
tat-ca-anta: - karaṇaṃ	the ( inner instrument ) Antahkarana
vibho	O All pervading Lord!
tava balāt	by Thy will (power)
sattvāṃśa: eva-	the Satwic aspect (of Ahankaara) itself
asṛjat	created (the Antahkarana)
jāta: - taijasata:	from the Taijasa aspect was born
daśa-indriya-gaṇa:	the group of ten indriyaas
tat-tāmasa-aṃśāt-	from the Tamas aspect
puna:	again
tanmātraṃ nabhasa:	the subtle essence (Tanmaatra) of space
marutpurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
śabd: -ajani	sound was born
tvat-balāt	by Thy will (power)
O Infinite One! By Thy will, from the Saatwic aspect of Ahankaara, the inner equipment of Antahkarana was born, consisting of, Manas, Buddhi, Ahankaara and Chitta. From the Raajasic aspect of the Ahankaara the ten Indriyaas were born (5 Karmendriyaas and 5 Jnanendriyaas). O Lord! by Thy will, from the Taamasic aspect of the Ahankaara was born, the sound (Sabda) which is the subtle essence (Tanmaatra) of space (Aakaash).
śbdādvyoma tata: sasarjitha vibho sparśaṃ tato mārutaṃ
tasmādrūpamato maho'tha ca rasaṃ toyaṃ ca gandhaṃ mahīm |
evaṃ mādhava pūrvapūrvakalanādādyādyadharmānvitaṃ
bhūtagrāmamimaṃ tvameva bhagavan prākāśayastāmasāt ||8||
śbdāt-vyoma	from sound, space
tata: sasarjitha	then,Thou created
vibho	O All pervading Lord !
sparśaṃ	touch
tata: mārutaṃ	then air
tasmāt-rūpam-	from that (air) form
ata: maha: -	then fire
atha ca rasaṃ	and after that taste
toyaṃ ca gandhaṃ mahīm	then water smell and earth (were born)
evaṃ mādhava	in this manner O Maadhava!
pūrva-pūrva-kalanāt-	because of association with the preceding (product)
ādya-ādya-dharma-anvitaṃ	having the qualities of the earlier products
bhūta-grāmam-imamaṃ	this group of subtle elements
tvameva bhagavan	Thou alone O Lord!
prākāśaya:	did bring into existence
tāmasāt	from the Tamasa Ahankaara
O All pervading Lord! From the Tanmaatra of (Shabda) the subtle element of sound, came the element (Aakaash) Space and from it touch (Sparsh). From touch (Sparsh) came the element Air (Vaayu) and from it form (Roopa). From form (Roopa) came the element Fire (Agni) and from it Taste (Rasa). From the Tanmaatra of Taste (Rasa) came the element Water (Jala) and from it smell (Gandha). From smell (Gandha) came the element Earth (Bhoomi). O Maadhava! By Thy will, thus from the Tamasa aspect of Ahankaara, were born the five Tanmaatras and the five Pancha Bhootas each element having the qualities of the preceding one.
ete bhūtagaṇāstathendriyagaṇā devāśca jātā: pṛthaṅ-
no śekurbhuvanāṇḍanirmitividhau devairamībhistadā |
tvaṃ nānāvidhasūktibhirnutaguṇastattvānyamūnyāviśaṃ-
śceṣṭāśaktimudīrya tāni ghaṭayan hairaṇyamaṇḍaṃ vyadhā: ||9||
ete bhūtagaṇā: -	all these elements
tathā-indriyagaṇā:	and the sense organs and the organs of action
devā: ca	and their presiding deities
jātā:	which had come into existence
pṛthak no śeku: -	were not capable by themselves
bhuvana-aṇḍa-nirmiti-vidhau	of creating the Brahmaand (the cosmic whole)
devai: amībhi: tadā	therefore these presiding deities, then
tvaṃ nānā-vidha-sūktibhi:-nuta-guṇa:-	sung Thy excellences by means of various hymns
tattvāni-amūni-āviśan-	(then Thou) entering these categories
ceṣṭā-śaktim-udīrya	and activating them
tāni ghaṭayan	and combining them
hairaṇyam-aṇḍam	the Golden Egg (the potential universe)
vyadhā:	created
O Lord! Even though all these elements, sense organs , the organs of action, and their presiding deities came into existence, they could not by themselves create the Brahmaanda. Then the presiding deities glorified Thee by various hymns and Thou entered into all of them, activated them and combining them, created the Hiranya Andam (the Golden Egg).
aṇḍaṃ tatkhalu pūrvasṛṣṭasalile'tiṣṭhat sahasraṃ samā:
nirbhindannakṛthāścaturdaśajagadrūpaṃ virāḍāhvayam |
sāhasrai: karapādamūrdhanivahairniśśeṣajīvātmako
nirbhāto'si marutpurādhipa sa māṃ trāyasva sarvāmayāt ||10||
aṇḍaṃ tat-khalu	that Brahamanda, indeed
purva-sṛṣṭa-salile-	in the already created Cosmic Waters
atiṣṭhat	(which) remained
sahastraṃ samā:	for a thousand years
nirbhindan-	(Thou) breaking it open
akṛthā: -	Thou did make (it)
caturdaśa-jagat-rūpaṃ	in the form of the fourteen worlds
virāṭa-ahvayam	known as 'Virat Swarupa'
sāhastrai: karapādamūrdhanivahai: -	with thousands of hands, feet and heads
niśśeṣa jīvātmaka:	as all beings (Samashti - total life form of all beings)
nirbhāta: asi	Thou did shine (manifest Thyself)
marutpurādhipa	O Lord of Guruvayur!
sa māṃ trāyasva	That Thou (of such nature) protect me
sarva-āmayāt	from all ailments
This Golden Egg or Brahmanda remained in the already created cosmic waters for a thousand years. Thereafter, breaking it Thou made it into 14 spheres (worlds), which is known as Thy Viraat Roopa (cosmic form); in which Thou shone as all beings with thousands of hands, feet, heads etc. O Lord of Guruvaayur, who thus manifested in cosmic form, please protect me from all my ailments.